Earlier, we talked about the importance of context in
solving analytical problems and we learn how to construct
a conceptual model of how an industry or
a business functions and map out how important elements relate to each other.
In this video, we take the idea of context a bit further.
For you to be successful as an analytical professional in a real organization,
it's critical that you have a good working understanding of where the data you
use comes from and what real world phenomena that data describes.
It's also important that you understand how
the results of your analyses will be used to make
decisions and ultimately how they will lead
to some specific action that is taken in the marketplace.
Why is this so important?
It turns out that the life of a data analyst is much more than just crunching
numbers and applying analytical methods to discover meaning in the data.
Sure, that part of the job is certainly a lot of fun,
but the reality is that we spend an awful lot of
time trying to understand how to get data,
where does it come from?
Where is it located?
How do I access it? Is it any good?
Does it really represent the phenomenon I'm trying to understand?
On the flip side, the job doesn't end once the analysis is complete.
We need to be able to communicate the results of the analysis,
make some sort of assessment that drives a decision and actually do something.
Otherwise, why do we go through all the trouble in the first place?
While the analysis itself might be the most interesting part of the job,
the reality is a good part of your time and energy will probably be
spent on activities that happen upstream and downstream of the math.
The better you are at understanding the value of each step,
the more effective you will be as an analyst.
The way we illustrate this idea is through
a framework we call the information-action value chain.
For those of you not familiar with the term value chain,
it's an idea that describes a sequential process where each step adds some sort
of value to an object or an idea relative to a desired end point or outcome.
In our case, we start with an idea or event in the real world
and our desired outcome is the ability to take an action in the marketplace.
In this video, we're going to focus on
the part of the value chain that happens before the analysis.
In the next video, we'll focus on
the analysis itself and what happens after the analysis.
In both videos, we use an example to illustrate each step.
So let's get started. We start with something in the real world.
This can be an event like someone making a purchase or using a product or service.
It could be the person or the product itself.
It could really be anything, even a natural
event like a thunderstorm or the temperature outside.
For any of these things to be useful to me as an analyst, I need to have data.
There needs to be a mechanism captures
the physical or digital representation of
that real world phenomenon and puts it somewhere.
Usually this happens via some sort of front-end system
or a system that interacts directly with customers or physical objects.
For now, let's assume that we are interested in one type of event,
a wireless customer cancelling their telephone service.
Let's assume our analysis will focus on
examining the number and types of customers that cancel.
Most wireless services are subscription based and the cancel
service it's often the case that I need to proactively contact my wireless provider.
So let's say, I call my provider and after
attempting a few offers they get me to stick around for a while.
They ultimately agree to cancel my service.
How is this event captured?
What usually happens is that
the customer service representative who is cancelling my service accesses
the wireless companies billing system and changes
some key attribute of my account to reflect that service should be disconnected.
Among other things, there is usually
a cancellation date or other time stamp that represents the cancellation of it.
It's that piece of data that will ultimately need to be available for our analysis.
The point here is that for every event of interest in the real world,
there needs to be a system that captures it.
We often refer to these as source systems or
the systems that serve as the sources for the data we want to get.
There are many different types of
source systems and we'll talk about them more in a later video.
So now that I've got these events captured,
I'm ready to start my analysis,
right? Well not quite.
It turns out that many source systems are great for capturing
data but not so great for extracting data for analysis.
A lot of source systems are what we call transactional systems or systems
that are optimized for capturing transactional data one event at a time.
Other systems capture information in
an unstructured way that is not always suitable for analysis.
Furthermore, if systems are critical to the real time operations of the business,
we may not want analysts poking around and potentially disrupting or breaking them.
Perhaps most importantly, my analysis might
require that I get information from more than one source system.
In fact, it may be the case they need data from many sources system.
It would be pretty tedious to have to go
and grab information from all those sources one at
a time and try to make sense of how they all
fit together every time I had to do an analysis.
For all these reasons,
it's usually convenient to bring data together in some common location.
Most often this location is a physical system called a
data warehouse or enterprise data warehouse.
Although there are a lot of emerging methods of doing this both physical and virtual.
This is the third step in our value chain.
Bringing information together in this way not
only reduces the amount of effort needed to access
information but also allows us to make the data more usable by cleaning or filtering it,
automatically checking for any issues with the data,
establishing known relationships among different types of data,
and transforming the data in ways that make it more
consumable and useful for downstream applications.
Earlier, we said we wanted to examine the number
and types of customers that cancel their wireless service.
We identified the billing system as a source of the cancellation event information.
We would expect that information to flow into our data warehouse,
perhaps as part of a customer or subject area.
But what about the types of customers that cancel?
We might find the information around
customer characteristics is from a different source system,
like an external credit agency or consumer database.
We would expect that information to be in our data warehouse as well.
We'd like it to be linked somehow to our billing data,
perhaps using a name,
address or other customer identifier.
With all the information we need in one place,
it's much easier to assemble it for analysis.
Okay. So now we have identified the real world phenomenon we're interested in, check.
We figured out how that information gets captured by the source system, check.
We have even made sure that all the information we need
is in a common place we can get to it, check.
So now, we're ready to start that analysis, right? Unfortunately, no.
How do you actually get the data?
Sure, it's sitting all nice and neat in the database but that doesn't do
you a lot of good if you're using statistical software package,
a standalone business intelligence tool or even Excel.
More often than not, you need a manageable data set that you can feed
into your analytical applications to actually accomplish the analysis.
To get this data, you need some way of extracting
just the information you need from
the database and this is the fourth stage of our value chain.
The ability to pull data directly is one of the skills that makes
a good analyst a truly indispensable part of an analytical team.
It's a crucial skill that's missing from a lot of analytical education programs.
That's why we're dedicating an entire module to it in this course.
We'll focus on something called the relational database and on
a programming language called Structured Query language or SQL,
which remains the dominant method of storing and
extracting data in most industries and organizations.
Certainly, there are other methods.
You may hear terms like data virtualization,
data federation or in-database analytics which offer alternatives to both the storage of
structured information and relational databases
or bypass the need to explicitly extract data from them.
We'll actually spend a later video talking about these ideas at a high level.
But the truth is that an awful lot of analysis done today uses relational database data.
If you're going to be effective in today's marketplace,
you need to be at least conversant in those technologies and methods.
Now, revisiting our customer cancellation example,
let's consider what exactly we need to get
out of our data warehouse to feed our analysis.
Again, we want to understand what types of people cancel service.
So it might be reasonable to get data at the customer level.
We'd also need to link up
any characteristics of customers that we think might define their type.
Of course, we need some indicator as to whether or not they cancel their service.
If we also wanted to understand what makes customers who
cancel different from customers who don't cancel,
we want to pull the same data for customers that did not cancel as well.
So at long last,
we have the data we need to actually execute an analysis.
As you'll learn in later courses,
there are a wide selection of methods, techniques,
and tools available to you to perform
data analysis but they broadly fall into three categories;
descriptive analytics, predictive analytics and prescriptive analytics.
In our next video,
we'll talk about these three different types of analysis.
We'll discover that completing the analysis
only begins the second half of our journey toward action.
For now, let's recap what we've learned to this point.
We realize that everything starts with events or characteristics in the real world.
We talked about how those events need to be
captured by source systems and turned into data.
We learned how data from source systems can be brought
together into one common location for access and storage.
Finally we saw the need to be able to extract only the data we need for analysis.